**Bando Mitsugoro III as Shigetada (right) and Ichikawa Danjuro VII as Kagekiyo (left) in _Kagekiyo_** c. 1826/7

_Kunisada 77_

Given to the Fitzwilliam Museum by E. Evelyn Barron in 1937

An interesting case where a [surimono](/context/textP) was produced for a play that was advertised but never performed. _Kagekiyo_ was announced to open at the Ichimura theatre on the 9th day of the first month of 1827 with Danjuro VII as Taira no Kagekiyo, and Mitsugoro III as Hatakeyama Shigetada. However, the theatre burned down a few days before the opening and Danjuro VII was immediately recruited to perform at the Kawarazaki theatre in _Sato no haru meibutsu amigasa_ (Famous sedge hats during spring in Yoshiwara).

Kagekiyo was the subject of several of the Eighteen Plays (_Kabuki Juhachiban_) selected by Danjuro VII as specially associated with the Ichikawa lineage of actors. Head samurai of the Taira clan, he was often presented as a master of the narrow escape, particularly in his failed attempts to assassinate Minamoto Yoritomo, head of the Genji clan. In this scene he disguises himself as a monk-soldier of the Todaiji temple in Nara, and waits for a chance to attack Yoritomo who is behind the curtain in the Great Buddha Hall officiating at the dedication of the newly restored temple in 1195. At this moment Yoritomo's vassal, Shigetada, sees through the disguise. The design on the curtain and on Shigetada's robe is the symbol of the Genji; the design on his pantaloons is Mitsugoro's symbol.

The printing of this surimono employs a variety of exquisite effects, including the embossing of the texture of the billowing curtain, the metallic pigments on the armour, and the flecked pattern on the stone pavement which was sprayed through a bamboo straw. On some other impressions the seal of the printer Shunfudo Ryucho appears.
