
**Picture of the calligraphy and painting party held at Mampachiro _Mampachiro-jo shoga-kaiseki no zu_**

Kunisada 90

The same: number 2 (Onajiku sono ni)

_Onajiku sono ni_

1827

Given to the Fitzwilliam Museum by E. Evelyn Barron in 1938

A pair of [surimono](/themes/surimono-and-special-printing-effects) made for a small album distributed at a calligraphy and painting party held at Mampachiro Restaurant, Yanagibashi, Ryogoku on the 27th day of the third month 1827, to announce the assumption of the name Takasada by Kunisada's son. The preface to the album by Rokujuen (the author Ishikawa Masamochi) suggests that Takasada was an unwilling participant in the party and that he was only there at the insistence of Kunisada. No work by Takasada has yet been identified. Kunisada and his son, together with all of the actors depicted in the prints, contributed _haikai_ poems to the album. The only known surviving copy of the album (Japanese private collection) is inscribed on the back cover by Danjuro VII.

Several Kabuki actors from Kyoto and Osaka who were performing in Edo in 1827 are among those depicted. From right to left, in the first print (top) : [Ichikawa Danjuro VII](/exhibition/group-8-part-3) (1791-1859), [Iwai Kumesaburo II,](/exhibition/group-19) later Hanshiro VI (1779-1836), Arashi Kanjuro I (1774-1827), Bando Mitsugoro III (1775-1831), Bando Hikosaburo IV (1800-1873), and Iwai Shijaku I, later Hanshiro VII (1804-1845). In the second print (bottom): Matsumoto Koshiro V (1764-1838), Mimasu Gennosuke I, later Daigoro IV (1798-1859), Iwai Hanshiro V, later Tojaku (1776-1849), Nakamura Denkuro V (1800-1851), [Segawa Kikunojo V](/exhibition/group-7) (1802-1832), Kataoka Nizaemon VII (1755-1837), and [Onoe Kikugoro III](/exhibition/group-16-part-1) (1784-1849).
