
**Prints from a set depicting _Saruwaka hisago no gumbai_ (Saruwaka's gourd-crested battle fan) performed at the Nakamura Theatre in 11/1820**  

Private collection

Four prints from the series are displayed here, only two of which are known in other impressions. These were Kunisada's first _oban_ (standard-format) half-length portraits for four years, with the exception of fan portraits. In each print in this series, the subtlety of the printing in relation to the design is evident in the use of diluted black ink for the calligraphic strokes that define the kimono and sash as well as the actor's name and role, the artist's signature, the censor's seal and the publisher's mark. As an added refinement, the poem in the actor's own hand is printed in colour set off by the delicate pink ground. This was the first time that a poem by the featured actor had been included on commercially issued actor-portraits. Such poems became a standard feature of Kunisada's half-length actor portraits, and are found on 110 of the 200 portraits issued between 1820 and 1840 (although they are never encountered on commercially issued full-figure actor prints).  

The Saruwaka in the title of the play is Saruwaka Kanzaburo, who was given official permission by the Shogun to open the [Saruwaka Theatre](/themes/saruwaka-street) (later renamed Nakamura when the family name changed), the first Kabuki theatre in Edo. The title thereby associates this performance with the Nakamura theatre. The 'gourd-crest' in the title belonged to the great warlord Hideyoshi, an indication that the play was one of the _Taikoki mono_ (plays about the _taiko_), telling the story of the sixteenth-century warlord Hideyoshi, but with changed names. The identity of such historical characters was disguised to avoid infringing the ban on their portrayal on stage or in prints.
