**Bando Mitsugoro III as Minamoto no Yorimasa (right),** **Segawa Kikunojo V (centre) and Ichikawa Danjuro VII as I no Hayata (left)**

1820

Given to the Fitzwilliam Museum by E. Evelyn Barron in 1938

A set of three spring _kyoka_ [surimono](/theme/surimono-and-special-printing-effects), probably made for the year of the dragon 1820 (a dragon motif appears in the border). The prints form a triptych showing a scene which appeared in plays performed by the Ichikawa lineage of actors, and derived from the warrior chronicles _Heike monogatari_ and _Gempei seisuiki_. In 1153 the Emperor commanded the poet and warrior Minamoto no Yorimasa (1104-80) to discover the cause of the cries that emanated every night from a black cloud hanging over the palace, which frightened him senseless. Yorimasa took with him the loyal henchman I no Hayata.

When the black cloud appeared from the forest, Yorimasa fired an arrow at it, whereupon a monstrous creature with the head of a monkey, the body of a badger, the tail of a serpent and the legs of a tiger, fell from the cloud uttering the cry of the golden mountain thrush. Hayata rushed forward and stabbed it. The story of the killing of the Nue (as it was called) was adapted as a No play and was incorporated by Danjuro II into the Kabuki play _Yorimasa sambaso_ in 1708, which was subsequently performed in many versions.

The two outer prints conform closely to other representations of the scene (such as an early Meiji period theatre sign painted by Kunisada's pupil, Kunitoshi, now in the British Museum), but the central female figure (apparently performing a dance) takes the place of the usual depiction of the monstrous Nue. This supports the idea that this is an 'imaginary grouping' of the scene rather than a record of an actual production.

This seems confirmed by the fact that these three actors had not appeared together in these roles by 1820, the date suggested by the zodiac references to the year of the dragon that appear in the borders and in one of the poems on the central image, which mentions a 'dragon spring'. Danjuro's symbols the [_mimasu_ (triple-rice-measure)](/theme/actors-names-and-crests) and peony appear along the edge of his armour.
