Info

**Iwai Kumesaburo II as Agemaki (right) and Onoe Kikugoro III as Shimbei (left) in _Sukeroku yukari no Edo zakura_ (Sukeroku's affinity for the cherry blossoms of Edo)**

c. 1830

Given to the Fitzwilliam Museum by E. Evelyn Barron in 1937

Two sheets from a set of five [surimono](/context/textP) showing a scene from one of the Eighteen Plays (_Kabuki Juhachiban_) selected by Danjuro VII as specially associated with the Ichikawa lineage of actors. The missing central sheet shows Danjuro VII playing the role of Sukeroku. The print probably records a performance in Osaka, where these actors were present for New Year of 1830. Their journey from Edo is reflected in the imagery of the poems. The missing outer sheets show the villain Ikkyu (right) and the noodle-seller Fukeroku (left).

Sukeroku is in reality Soga no Goro, while Shimbei is his elder brother, Soga no Juro, who is posing as a sake seller (although he still wears a costume decorated with the flying-plovers pattern associated with Soga no Juro). Sukeroku learns that his missing heirloom sword Tomokirimaru is in the possession of Ikkyu, the villainous patron of Sukeroku's secret lover Agemaki, who is a Yoshiwara courtesan. He subsequently wins the sword back in a fight in which Ikkyu is killed, and escapes with the help of Agemaki.

A poem by Ryuotei Edo no Hananari on the sheet depicting Kumesaburo alludes to irises, one of his symbols, while the reference to Edo purple (_murasaki_) also alludes to the purple headband worn by Sukeroku in this play:

_Lovely coloured strands  
of iris flowers  
purple as Edoflow in streams to Naniwa \[Osaka\]  
and knot Agemaki's robes.  

_A poem by Ryukatei Fushi Mizugaki on the sheet depicting Kikugoro puns on the word for plum blossom (_bai_), which is associated with Osaka and also forms the first character of _Baiko_ ('Plum luck'), the actor's poetry name. The other poem by Ryuotei Edo no Hananari puns on the actor's family name Onoe, which means 'peak', while the mention of sake alludes to Shimbei's guise as a sake seller:

_His beauty  
like an alluring fragrance  
drifts to another place;  
our elder brother flourishes  
in the Naniwa \[Osaka\] spring  

Admired by all -  
the best in three capitals! -  
Onoe, like the peak of Fuji  
covered with snow  
made of white sake._



The Fitzwilliam Museum
